section of the site, and they used the
elements on the page to tie them all
Color coding of sections is a very
count on everyone noticing it. Some
and 1 out of 12 men¡ªparticularly
detect some color distinctions
More importantly, from what I¡¯ve
(perhaps as many as half ) just aren¡¯t
cue, but you should never rely on it as the only cue. 
miss. And since the inactive tabs were a neutral beige, there was a lot of
active tab.
street  s igns and breadcrumbs
chapter 6
when I enter a site (as on Quicken.com, for instance), I lose the impact of the
Amazon has always had a tab selected on their Home page. For a long time, it
Eventually, though, as the site became increasingly less book-centric, they gave
Amazon had to create the Welcome tab so they could promote products from
risk of alienating existing customers who still think of Amazon as primarily a
interface problem is just a reflection of a deeper¡ªand harder to solve¡ªdilemma.
www.amazon.com
street  s igns and breadcrumbs
Now that you have a feeling for all of the moving parts, you¡¯re ready to try my
Imagine that you¡¯ve been blindfolded and locked in the trunk of a car, then
bowels of a Web site. If the page is well designed, when your vision clears 
> What site is this? (Site ID) 
> What are the major sections of this site? (Sections)
> Where am I in the scheme of things? (¡°You are here¡± indicators)
Why the Goodfellas motif? Because it¡¯s so easy to forget that the Web experience
designing pages, it¡¯s tempting to think that people will reach them by starting at 
is that we¡¯re often dropped down in the middle of a site with no idea where we 
we¡¯ve never seen this site¡¯s navigation scheme before.17
test isn¡¯t whether you can figure it out given enough time and close scrutiny. The
matter whether you¡¯re looking closely or not. You want to be relying solely on the
17 This is even truer today than it was five years ago, since for many people everything they do
18 Tom Tullis of Fidelity Investments did an ingenious experiment along the same lines to
nonsense text and asked people to identify the various elements like the page title and the 
[ 86 ]
Here¡¯s how you perform the trunk test:
Step 2 Hold it at arm¡¯s length or squint so you can¡¯t really study it closely.
(You won¡¯t find all of the items on every page.)
Site ID
Sections 
Search
2. Page name
4. Local navigation
6. Search
[ 87 ]
Now try it yourself on the four web pages below. Then compare your answers
And when you¡¯ve finished, try the same exercise on a dozen random pages from
what doesn¡¯t.
1
chapter 6
Answers on page 91
3
street  s igns and breadcrumbs
4
chapter 6
THIS PICTURE?
the page name, but it¡¯s not.
other plans first,¡± but you
there¡¯s no page name, and (b)
in the list on the left.
search button, which is amazing
full of useful content) as
¡°
content space,
the list on the left, and 
Utilities list.
< MY VERSION
Site ID Section
navigation
[ 91 ]
WHAT¡¯S WRONG WITH THIS
The Site ID is below the navigation, and hard to
next to it, and because the Site ID isn¡¯t in the
The heading DVD is positioned above the link
archy. And there¡¯s no search, which is baffling 
< THEIR REVISED VERSION
redesigned their site and did most of the right
the Site ID to the top of the page and added a
But as so often happens with redesigns, for
instance, the Utilities went from one legible
stacking underlined text links; they¡¯re very
< MY VERSION
name, so the visual hierarchy matches the
little more prominent, and moved it flush left
or right alignment is more effective than
For the same reason, I moved the search
centered below it.
Sections
Local 
[ 92 ]
WHAT¡¯S WRONG WITH THIS
The navigation is spread out all over the page,
what isn¡¯t. The navigation, ads, promos, and content
There is no list of major sections. The list at the top
sub-sites of CNET.com. What makes it particularly
appear in that list.
Builder.com is the Breadcrumbs.
starts. This is one of those pages that seems to keep
out what it is.
This is one of those pages where you have to have
There are underlying dilemmas here that need to be
layout.
make the content space easier to spot by adding a
At the same time, I made sure that the page name
content space.
Page name
Search
street  s igns and breadcrumbs
THIS PICTURE?
trouble finding anything?
< MY VERSION
here.
they used "Enter Keywords" here when
everywhere else in the site.)
worth adding the word "for" so it reads
I also made the page name a little more
between the content and navigation
You are here
Search
Local navigation
The first step 
admitting that
is beyond 
designing the home page
7123456 89
esigning a Home page often reminds me
Each contestant would listen patiently while
had to perform. For instance, ¡°You have 45
into the colander strapped to your head.¡±  
with a little luck. 
begin, Bud would always add, ¡°Oh, there¡¯s
it...blindfolded.¡± Or ¡°¡­under water.¡± Or ¡°¡­in the fifth dimension.¡± 
bases, there¡¯s always just one¡­more¡­thing.
> Site identity and mission. Right off the bat, the Home page has to tell me 
not at some other site.
to offer¡ªboth content (¡°What can I find here?¡±) and features (¡°What can I do
navigation.
Home page.
¡ªdesi arnaz, as ricky ricardo 
Bud Collyer offers words of encouragement to
> Teases. Like the cover of a magazine, the
of the ¡°good stuff¡± inside. Content
most popular pieces of content, like top
invite me to explore additional sections
personalization and email newsletters.
depends on my coming back often, the
content that gets updated frequently.
visitors needs some signs of life¡ªeven if
to signal me that it¡¯s not moribund.
allocated for whatever advertising, cross-
been made.
for instance) may deserve their own links on the Home page so people don¡¯t
> Registration. If the site uses registration, the Home page needs links for new
signed in (¡°Welcome back, Steve Krug¡±).
abstract objectives:
how to get to whatever I want¡ªassuming it¡¯s somewhere on the site.
chapter 7
Mission
Promos
cuts
Feature
Timely 
Timely content
Hierarchy
Search
Content promos
expose me to some of the wonderful things the site has to offer that I might be
> Show me where to start. There¡¯s nothing worse than encountering a new
> Establish credibility and trust. For some visitors, the Home page will be
And you have to do it¡­blindfolded
Some of the usual constraints:
sees¡ªand the only page some visitors will see¡ªthings that are prominently
As a result, the Home page is the waterfront property of the Web: It¡¯s the most
stake in the site wants a promo or a link to their section on the Home page, and
And given the tendency of most users to scan down the page just far enough to
fold¡±1 on the Home page is the choice waterfront property, even more fiercely
> Too many cooks. Because the Home page is so important, it¡¯s the one page
> One size fits all. Unlike lower-level pages, the Home page has to appeal to
[ 97 ]
1 A term inherited from newspapers, meaning the part of the page you can see without scrolling.
The First Casualty of War
the best Home page design can¡¯t do it all. Designing a Home page inevitably
mounts to squeeze in just one more thing, some things inevitably get lost in the
The one thing you can¡¯t afford to lose in the shuffle¡ªand the thing that most
Home page design to look at, there¡¯s one thing I can almost always count on:
Everybody wants to drop a line on the Home page.
link) and a good location (above the fold).
As quickly and clearly as possible, the Home page needs to answer the four
I need to be able to answer these questions at a glance, correctly and
If it¡¯s not clear to me what I¡¯m looking at in the first few seconds, interpreting
misinterpret something and get frustrated. 
on the page, which greatly improves my chances of having a satisfying, successful
Don¡¯t get me wrong: Everything else is important. You do need to impress me,
through the cracks; there will always be plenty of people¡ªinside and outside the
has a vested interest in getting the main point across.
the home page is  beyond your control
www.essential.com
have here?
do here?
here¡ªand not
[ 100 ]
2 From the Wall Street Journal, March 30, 2000: 
¡°gerbils¡± being shot out of a cannon. [These have been replaced by] staid spots in which
technology, and electronic equipment). ¡°We could have told you that, but we shot gerbils out
When you¡¯re involved in building a site, it¡¯s so obvious to you
remember that it¡¯s not obvious to everybody.
explanation of what it is every time they go there¡ªunless it
what JAMA is, will you be o?ended by seeing ¡°Journal of the
It¡¯s tempting to think that the people who don¡¯t ¡°get¡± your site
true. When testing sites, it¡¯s not at all unusual to have people
clear what it was.¡±
2
time they get to your site will they remember exactly what it
If the site is very complex or novel, a prominent ¡°New to this
for spelling out the big picture in plain sight, since most people
tough it out on their own. And by then, they may already be
THE TOP FIVE PLAUSIBLE EXCUSES FOR 
We don¡¯t need to.
After people have
tion once, they will
Anybody who really
will know what it is.
advertising is for.
a ¡°First time
How to get the message across
is. But there are two important places on the page where we expect to find explicit
> The tagline. One of the most valuable bits of real estate is the space right next 
know it¡¯s meant to be a tagline, and so we read it as a description of the whole
> The Welcome blurb. The Welcome blurb is a terse description of the site,
The point isn¡¯t that everyone will use these two elements¡ªor even that everyone 
the overall content of the Home page. But if they can¡¯t guess, you want to have
There is also a third possibility: You can use the entire space to the right of the 
make sure that the visual cues make it clear that this whole area is a modifier for
and are likely to ignore it.
the home page is  beyond your control
Tagline
> Use as much space as necessary. The temptation is to not want to use any
and (b) everyone¡¯s clamoring to use the Home page space for other purposes. 
your own utility providers), Essential.com has a lot of ¡¯splainin¡¯ to do, so they
helps explain or reinforce what the site is about.
chapter 7
2. Prominent but terse
Why, How, and Plus are
into a bulleted list so it
long, imposing block of
3. The heading Shop By
clear that the point of
buy something, not just
4. The testimonial quote
draws your eye to it) tells
1
4
> ¡­but don¡¯t use any more space than necessary. For most sites, there¡¯s no
take up the entire Home page are usually too much for people to bother
no longer. Don¡¯t feel compelled to mention every great feature, just the most
> Don¡¯t use a mission statement as a Welcome blurb. Many sites fill their
written by a Miss America finalist. ¡°XYZCorp offers world-class solutions in
> It¡¯s one of the most important things to test. You can¡¯t trust your own
your organization to tell you whether the design is getting this job done
notice is missing.
A tagline is a pithy phrase that characterizes the whole enterprise, summing up
advertising, entertainment, and publishing: ¡°Thousands of VCRs at impossibly 
Fit to Print,¡±4 for example.
the home page is  beyond your control
4 The New York Times. I have to admit a personal preference for the Mad magazine parody
On a Web site, the tagline appears right below, above, or next to the Site ID.
one place on the page where users most expect to find a concise statement of the
Some attributes to look for when choosing a tagline:
> Bad taglines are vague.
enough to convey a full thought, but short enough to absorb easily.
chapter 7
on a Web site it doesn¡¯t tell me enough.
¡°
the business of running your
opposite extreme: It¡¯s too long.
www.computerunderground.com
www.onvia.com
> Bad taglines sound generic. 
¡°You¡¯re in good hands,¡± or ¡°To protect and to serve.¡± A motto expresses a
Mottoes are lofty and reassuring, but if I don¡¯t know what the thing is, a motto
> Good taglines are personable, lively, and sometimes clever. Clever is good,
[ 105 ]
Saving time, money, and sanity are all clearly good
Cradle and all¡± is a very clever, engaging tagline. But it might give
buying baby ¡°stu?,¡± when in reality it¡¯s also an excellent source of
Fortunately, BabyCenter had the sense
works: almost short enough to read,
make it scannable.
www.netmarket.com
Tagline? We don¡¯t need no stinking tagline 
> The handful of sites that
household word status.5
well known from their 
Personally, though, I¡¯d argue that even these sites would benefit from a tagline. 
to tell people why they¡¯re better off at your site? And even if a site comes from a
to explain the difference.
Once I know what I¡¯m looking at, there¡¯s still one more important question that
[ 106 ]
5 Even Amazon had a tagline until as late as 1998, when it was 
Where do I
When I enter a new site, after a quick look around the Home page I should be
> Here¡¯s where to start if I want to search. 
> Here¡¯s where to start if I want to sample their best stuff. 
for instance), the entry point for the process should leap out at me. And on sites
places where I register or sign in should be prominent.
supports this week¡¯s business model) sometimes obscures these entry points. 
and ¡°No, click me first!¡±
entry points (i.e., make the search box look like a search box, and the list of
like ¡°Search,¡± ¡°Browse by Category,¡± ¡°Sign in,¡± and ¡°Start here¡± (for a step-by-
Home page navigation can be unique
Home page to be the same as on the rest of the site. For instance, if the persistent
The answer is definitely ¡°Yes, it can be different. But not too different.¡± 
use the persistent navigation there. Typical differences include: 
what lies below, you may want to add a descriptive phrase to each section name, or
[ 107 ]
> Different orientation. The Home page often requires a very different layout
vertical navigation, or vice versa.
in the persistent navigation, like the large sign over a store entrance, and it
on every page.
navigation and the persistent navigation need to have enough in common so
same thing.
order, the same wording, and the same grouping. It also helps to try to keep as
capitalization. 
execution, but there¡¯s too much of a disconnect between the navigation on the
[ 108 ]
Home page
It doesn¡¯t matter that the navigation is vertical on the Home page and horizontal
Carriers / Carrier and The Company / Company) are all right because it¡¯s
What does matter is that once you leave the Home page
> WildTalk disappears entirely
> Even the names that are the same aren¡¯t in the same order
all. When I leave the Home page, I have to figure out the site¡¯s navigation all over
[ 109 ]
Wildfire.com 
All other pages
chapter 7
Since Home page real estate is in such short
create more of it. One common approach is using
pulldowns definitely save space.
> You have to seek them out. You have to click on
for items on the list to catch your eye as you scan
Home page where you¡¯re trying to expose the 
> They¡¯re hard to scan. If designers use the standard HTML pulldown menu,
them more readable, and there¡¯s no really good way to divide the list into
> They¡¯re twitchy. Somehow the fact that the list comes and goes so quickly
Pulldowns are most effective for alphabetized lists of
products, because there¡¯s no thought involved. If I¡¯m
the V¡¯s. 
know the name of the thing I¡¯m looking for, especially if
scrolling. Good Not so good
Pulldown menu
menu, displayed
[ 111 ]
Unfortunately, since the main benefit of pulldowns is saving space, designers are
Some users love pulldowns because they¡¯re efficient; others won¡¯t touch them. In
Why Golden Geese make such tempting 
There¡¯s something about the Home page that seems to inspire shortsighted
phrase ¡°killing the golden goose¡± running through my head.8
everything.
Anything with a prominent Home page link is guaranteed to get more traffic¡ª
don¡¯t I have one?¡±
page aren¡¯t shared equally. The section that¡¯s being promoted gets a huge gain in
cluttered is shared by all sections.
Giant did have a goose that laid golden eggs, but nobody tried to kill it. The senseless
goose, man gets greedy, man kills goose, man gets no more eggs. Moral: ¡°Greed often
It¡¯s a perfect example of the tragedy of the commons.9 The premise is simple: Any
Take a town pasture, for example. For each animal a herdsman adds to the
benefit of +1. But the negative impact of adding an animal¡ªits contribution to
than ¨C1. 
And another, and another¡ªpreferably before someone else does. And since each
Preserving the Home page from promotional overload requires constant
just¡­one¡­more¡­thing. 
Home page, and offered other methods of driving traffic, like cross-promoting
page.
chapter 7
Lloyd, was popularized in a classic essay on overpopulation by biologist Garrett Hardin
[ 113 ]
You be the judge
at each one and answer these two questions, then compare your answers with mine.
> Do you know where to start?
[ 114 ]
Answers on page 118 www.productopia.com
the home page is  beyond your control
OF THIS SITE? 
me, at least) useful site with a simple
are (by checking off categories like Travel,
whisk you to another hand-picked, high-
each time you clicked on their "Next Site"
It was effortless, rewarding Web
take eTour out for a spin every few weeks
new out there.
the point of the site by reducing their
numbering them 1-2-3 to suggest that
Their tagline ("Surf the Web Without
it forced me to think about whether
surfing difficult. But as taglines go it¡¯s
Of course, eTour was luckier than most
hierarchy that they have to make visible,
the concept and the value proposition.
other similar sites because they stuck to
temptation to tout any of the site¡¯s other
they understood that the only thing that
Each click on eTour¡¯s
opens another site.
[ 116 ]
DO YOU KNOW WHERE 
Most of the people I¡¯ve shown eTour to were
three graphics first. But when that didn¡¯t work
big "Let¡¯s Go!" button at the bottom of the
The Big Button works well for first-time
big (and "Let¡¯s Go!" is so generic) that I clicked
should have clicked was the understated
fact, since a week or two elapsed between my
third visit, too. And my fourth.
The only changes I would make would be the
I¡¯d make it clear that the Big Button is for new
place to sign in right on the Home page.
I always assumed that the three graphics
text. But when I started looking at the page
show sample sites from three categories.
actually did tell the story. And I was surprised
[ 117 ]
it wasn¡¯t an improvement. In fact, overall it
The moral? Things on a Web page don¡¯t always
long as they seem to make sense.
I also tried another version where I took out
temptation to click on them. But I only
better with them. They seem to work as a
helps the user make sense out of the page.
is a small price to pay if the numbers make
THEIR REDESIGN 
redesigned their Home page. As is often the
forward¡­
and returning users by giving the Big
("Sign Up") and adding a sign-in box for
> They improved the tagline ("Your Personal
to another tagline ("Discover Sites You¡¯ll
...and a few steps back
pulldown menu, giving users one more
payo?.
with an animated GIF and a block of text
Animated GIF
chapter 7
Productopia was10 an excellent site, but you might not
The problem is a flaw in the visual hierarchy. Because the
inside the Yahoo-style directory panel, it comes across as a
And since the tagline is bland and lacking any detail, it fails
advice sites and ends up sounding like every other inflated
At first glance, the only message I get is that the site has
graphic style and the products pictured on the left strongly
products¡ªdesigner furniture, not Chia Pets.
reviews or reviews written by Productopia for specific
o?ers advice on finding the best product in a category in a
a product good in a given category.
for a Dualit 2 Slice toaster, I was shocked to find myself on a
about choosing a toaster.(There was a prominent link to the
categories: Quality, Style, and Value.) Overall, the Home page
It¡¯s unclear whether the area on the left is three promos
blurb.(The text, "top form /shapely showoffs smack of luxe"
10 Productopia met the same fate as eTour.
the home page is  beyond your control
experts provide you with the information
it needs to come before them. And, as usual,
crucial information: editors select products
or advertisers.
WHERE TO START?
page:
search box.
Yahoo-style directory.
products (if that¡¯s what they are).
what the site is, how do I decide what  
successful Home page has to tell me what
[ 120 ]
THEIR REVISED VERSION 
redesigned their Home page, improving it
They eliminated the stray tagline on the
Help You Find the Products You¡¯ll Love") at
And they shortened the crucial explanation
you choose the product that¡¯s right for
being read. But it¡¯s still buried at the
products section.
Policy, User Reviews, and so on) into a new
lumped them together with promos like
Cook?" It took me a while to figure out that
[ 121 ]
MY VERSION
top of the page with the Site ID, making 
entire site.
promos, and make it more prominent.
at the bottom of the page, grouping the
them on the left side.
most Web awards, these four are actually
Productopia on a short list of e-commerce
them up across the bottom of the page
Site of the Day" icons. This is a case where
convention.
and the Cowman
Friends¡±
about usability are a waste of time, and
chapter
[ 123 ]
issues over and over. 
One man likes to push a plough 
But that¡¯s no reason why they can't be friends
Rick from
Bob the
Caroline the
People don¡¯t  like
won¡¯t even go near 
pulldowns.
Project
featuring¡­
Caroline makes a suggestion¡­
pulldown menu for
Well, I don¡¯t think most
And they¡¯d save us a 
I hate
Besides, have
better idea?
I usually call these endless discussions ¡°religious debates,¡± because they have a
of people expressing strongly held personal beliefs about things that can¡¯t be
chapter 8
¡­but Bob plays his developer¡¯s trump card
any research data 
Did we ever make 
pulldowns?
be a problem using
ASP pages from our
Rick attempts an appeal to a higher authority¡­
my life.
everybody think?
using pulldowns?
important (whether it¡¯s attaining eternal peace, governing effectively, or just
anyone involved changing his or her point of view. 
team members, and can often prevent the team from making critical decisions. 
these debates almost inevitable. In this chapter, I¡¯ll describe these forces, and
Everybody likes ________.¡±
users. And like all Web users, we tend to have strong feelings about what we like
As individuals, we love Flash animations because they¡¯re cool; or we hate them
each page because they¡¯re familiar and easy to use, or we hate them because they¡¯re
And when we¡¯re working on a Web team, it turns out to be very hard to check
The result is usually a room full of individuals with strong personal convictions
And given the strength of
human nature¡ªthere¡¯s a
these likes and dislikes onto
that most Web users like the
to think that most Web users
the farmer and the cowman
¡°
They stink.
about them?
like pulldowns.
downs. What¡¯s
chapter 8
It¡¯s not that we think that everyone is like us. We know there are some people out
own Web team. But not sensible people. And there aren¡¯t many of them. 
On top of this layer of personal passion, there¡¯s another layer: professional
team have very different perspectives on what constitutes good Web design based
Take designers and developers, for instance. Designers tend to think that most 
visually interesting. In fact, they probably became designers because they enjoy
understand.2
features because they like sites with lots of cool features. 
want to build sites with interesting, original, elegant features. I¡¯m not sure who¡¯s
differences in perspective often lead to conflict¡ªand hard feelings¡ªwhen it
1 In the play, the thrifty, God-fearing, family-oriented farmers are always at odds with the
2 Yes, I¡¯m dealing in stereotypes here. But I think they¡¯re useful stereotypes.
The ideal Web
by someone
At the same time, designers and programmers find themselves siding together in
and craft.3
development) is focused on making whatever promises are necessary to attract
site, the burden of delivering on those promises lands on the shoulders of the
This Internet version of the perennial struggle between art and commerce (or
complexity to any discussions of usability issues¡ªoften in the form of apparently
the farmer and the cowman
3 See ¡°Corporate Culture in Internet Time¡± in strategy+business magazine 
4 I once saw a particularly puzzling feature on the Home page of a prominent¡ªand otherwise
dream, so we had to add it.¡± True story.
he wants everything to be
¡­in time for the trade
The myth of the Average User
average Web design meeting. But behind that belief lies another one, even more
As soon as the clash of personal and professional opinions results in a stalemate,
opinion, research, focus groups, or user tests) to determine what most users like
problem is, there is no Average User.
the opposite conclusion: all Web users are unique, and all Web use is 
The more you watch users carefully and listen to them articulate their intentions,
reactions to Web pages are based on so many variables that attempts to describe
productive. Good design, on the other hand, takes this complexity into account.
idea that good Web design is largely a matter of figuring out what people like. It¡¯s
or they¡¯re bad (because most people don¡¯t). You should have links to everything in
menus down the side. Frames, pages that scroll, etc. are either good or bad, black
The problem is there are no simple ¡°right¡± answers for most Web design
design that fills a need¡ªcarefully thought out, well executed, and tested. 
really like Flash, and an equal percent will probably say they hate it. But what
[ 128 ]
(lowercase), the arbitrary use of whiz-bang features to make a site more interesting.
long time to download and don¡¯t add any value. If you observe them carefully and
sites that use small, hardworking, well-thought-out bits of Flash to add a
That¡¯s not to say that there aren¡¯t some things you should never do, and some things
wrong. It¡¯s just that they aren¡¯t the things that Web teams usually argue about. 
The point is, it¡¯s not productive to ask questions like ¡°Do most people like
these items and this wording in this context on this page create a good experience
And there¡¯s really only one way to answer that kind of question: testing. You have 
build some version of the thing (even a crude version), then watch ordinary
There¡¯s no substitute for it. 
testing tends to defuse arguments and break impasses by moving the discussion
or doesn¡¯t work. And by opening our eyes to just how varied users¡¯ motivations,
users are like us. 
The next chapter explains how to test your own site.
[ 129 ]
on 10 cents a day
chapter
[ 131 ]
As soon as I hear ¡°launching in two weeks¡± (or even ¡°two months¡±) and ¡°usability
burning-chemical-factory feeling, because I have a pretty good idea of what¡¯s 
If it¡¯s two weeks, then it¡¯s almost certainly a request for a disaster check. The 
says, ¡°Maybe we better do some usability testing.¡±
internal debates¡ªusually about something very specific like color schemes. 
like the sexy one, some like the elegant one. Finally someone with enough clout 
some testing done to settle this.¡±
¡ªwhat everyone says at some point during the
A
gave me your name.
in two weeks and we want to do
¡­two weeks?
thing it usually ends up doing is revealing that the things they were arguing
best, only to learn that they forgot to put windows in the room. For instance, they
horizontal navigation bar or the vertical menus if nobody understands the value
Sadly, this is how most usability testing gets done: too little, too late, and for all
Repeat after me: 
Sometimes that initial phone call is even scarier:
request originated in Marketing. When Web sites are being designed, the folks in
ones who spend the most time trying to figure out who the site¡¯s audience is and
hands-on control over how the site actually gets put together. 
[ 132 ]
two weeks and we want to do
Focus group 
As the launch date approaches, the Marketing people may feel that their only hope
research they know is focus groups.
usability testing, not focus groups. Here¡¯s the difference in a nutshell:
react to ideas and designs that are shown to them. It¡¯s a group process, and much
groups are good for quickly getting a sampling of users¡¯ opinions and feelings
> In a usability test, one user at a time is shown something (whether it¡¯s a Web
either (a) figure out what it is, or (b) try to use it to do a typical task.
likes¡ªin the abstract. They¡¯re good for testing whether the idea behind the site
to test the names you¡¯re using for features of your site, and to find out how people
But they¡¯re not good for learning about whether your site works and how to improve it.
learn early on, before you begin designing the site. Focus groups are for EARLY in
check and fine-tune your message, but don¡¯t mistake them for usability testing. 
Several true things about testing
> If you want a great site, you¡¯ve got to test. After you¡¯ve worked on a site for
only way to find out if it really works is to test it.
[ 133 ]
[ 134 ]
know, uses the Web the way you do.
a broadening experience. It reminds you how different¡ªand the same¡ªpeople
But I finally realized that testing is really more like having friends visiting from
things about your home town that you usually don¡¯t notice because you¡¯re so
take for granted aren¡¯t obvious to everybody. 
works, and even the worst test with the wrong user will show you important
user test at my workshops so that people can see that it¡¯s very easy to do and it
have him try to perform a task on a site belonging to one of the other attendees.
usually scribbbles several pages of notes. And they always ask if they can have
that after his team saw the recording, they made one change to their site which
> Testing one user early in the project is better than testing 50 near the
into a big deal, you won¡¯t do it early enough or often enough to get the most out
it¡ªis almost always more valuable than a sophisticated test later.
to go in and make changes. The truth is, it turns out that it¡¯s not that easy to
almost any kind of change, and even apparently simple changes often turn out
the first place is gravy.
to do your testing with people who are like the people who will use your site,
is ¡°Recruit loosely, and grade on a curve.¡± 
inform your judgment. People like to think, for instance, that they can use
¡°b¡±, but you can¡¯t. No one has the resources to set up the kind of controlled
which, taken together with your experience, professional judgment, and
confidence¡ªbetween ¡°a¡± and ¡°b.¡±
You make something, test it, fix it, and test it again. 
Brothers¡¯ movies are so wonderful is that before they started filming
from the movie, doing five shows a day, improvising constantly and
after they¡¯d settled on a line, Groucho
see if it could be improved.
sale usability testing
simple: If you want to know whether your software or your Web site or your
use it and note where they run into trouble. Then fix it, and test it again.
had to have a usability lab with an observation room behind a one-way mirror,
thing they were using. You had to recruit a lot of people so you could get results 
[ 135 ]
Dumont) and Rufus T. Firefly
that were statistically significant. It was Science. It cost $20,000 to $50,000 a shot.
But in 1989 Jakob Nielsen wrote a paper titled ¡°Usability Engineering at a
chapter 9
It¡¯s true that most Web development schedules seem to be based
to everybody¡¯s to-do list, if you have to adjust development
them, then it won¡¯t get done. That¡¯s why you have to make testing
won¡¯t have to (a) argue endlessly, and (b) redo things at the end.
a camcorder from home, you¡¯ll only need to spend about $300 for
The least-known fact about usability testing is that it¡¯s incredibly
I¡¯ve never seen a usability test fail to produce useful results, no
You don¡¯t need one. All you really need is a room with a desk, a
One of the nicest things about usability testing is that the
The serious problems are hard to miss.
We don¡¯t have
We don¡¯t have 
We don¡¯t have 
We don¡¯t have a
We wouldn¡¯t know
the results.
MA, Sept. 1989. 
[ 137 ]
USERS PER TEST 
EFFORT
WHO DOES 
ADVANCE 
PREPARATION
DO YOU TEST?
WHAT HAPPENS
Usually eight or more to justify the 
Select carefully to match target 
A usability lab, with an observation
An experienced usability professional
advance to reserve a usability lab and
Draft, discuss, and revise a test 
Unless you have a huge budget, put all
when the site is nearly complete
A 20-page written report appears a
meets to decide what changes to make
Grab some people. Almost anybody who
Any office or conference room
Tests can be done almost any time, with
Decide what you¡¯re going to show
the development process
for each user) or less
stakeholders) debrief over lunch the
TRADITIONAL TESTING LOST-OUR-LEASE TESTING 
The idea of discount usability testing was a huge step forward. The only problem 
someone to conduct a test still costs $5,000 to $15,000, and as a result it doesn¡¯t
What I¡¯m going to commend to you in this chapter is something even more
I¡¯m going to try to explain how to do your own testing when you have no money
testing, by all means do it! But don¡¯t do it if it means you¡¯ll do less testing. 
[ 138 ]
In most cases, I tend to think the ideal number of users for each round of testing is
The first three users are very likely to encounter nearly all of the most significant
wring everything you can out of each round. Testing only three users helps
Also, since you will have fixed the problems you uncovered in the first round, in
since they won¡¯t be getting stuck on the first set of problems.
same day, so you can take advantage of what you¡¯ve learned right away. Also,
anyone has time to process¡ªmany of them about things that are really ¡°nits,¡±
In fact this is one of the reasons why I¡¯ve almost completely stopped generating
reviews and for usability tests. I finally realized that for most Web teams their
them, so it¡¯s important to stay focused on the most serious problems. Instead of
entire Web team, which may last for an hour or two. By the end of the call, we¡¯ve
them. 
at www.useit.com for a good discussion of the topic. 
test six or eight users since the additional cost per user will be comparatively low. But only if
Recruit loosely and grade on a curve
who they think will precisely reflect their target audience¡ªfor instance, male
experience who have recently purchased expensive shoes. 
matter who you test. 
know the basics.
[ 139 ]
FOUND: 5
TOTAL PROBLEMS
TWO TESTS WITH 3 USERS
find more problems
But the worst prob-
keep them from
to encounter 
Three users may
problems in a
But in the
with the first
fixed, they¡¯ll
they couldn¡¯t
the first test.
First test: 3 users
reduce the number of rounds of testing that you do, then by all means be as
tests, I recommend a different approach: 
In other words, try to find users who reflect your audience, but don¡¯t get hung up
you test and your audience. I favor this approach for three reasons: 
someone who¡¯s muddling through¡ªjust at a higher level. 
audience can use it. If you design a site for accountants using terminology
is that a small but not insignificant number of accountants won¡¯t know what
well as experts anyway, and if your grandmother can use it, an expert can. 
beginners. Everybody appreciates clarity. (True clarity, that is, and not just
The exceptions: 
it¡¯s no harder to recruit from that group, then do it. For instance, if your
> If your audience is split between clearly defined groups with very
at least once. For instance, if you¡¯re building a university site, for at least one
school seniors, and two administrators. But for the other rounds, you can
chapter 9
> If using your site requires specific domain knowledge (e.g., a currency
people with that domain knowledge for at least one round of tests. But don¡¯t do
When you¡¯re recruiting:
range from $50 for ¡°average¡± Web users to several hundred dollars for
offer people a little more than the going rate, since (a) it makes it clear that I
participate. Remember, even if the session is only 30 minutes, people usually
are curious about the process than people who are desperate for the money.
site and give us some feedback. It¡¯s very easy, and would take about forty-five
> Avoid discussing the site (or the organization behind the site)
what it is from a standing start. (Of course, if they¡¯re coming to your office,
> Don¡¯t be embarrassed to ask friends and neighbors. You don¡¯t have to feel
enjoy the experience. It¡¯s fun to have someone take your opinion seriously and
about the Web or computers in general.
[ 141 ]
All you really need is an office or conference room with two chairs, a PC or Mac
video cable, and a tripod. 
another office¡ªor even a cubicle¡ªnearby so everyone on the development team
The camcorder needs to transmit what the user sees (the computer screen or the
facilitator say.  In a usability lab, you¡¯ll often see a second camera used to show the
conveys frustration pretty effectively.
budget won¡¯t stretch that far, you can probably twist somebody¡¯s arm to bring in
chapter 9
Test subject (A) sits in front of computer monitor (B),
tions. Camcorder (D) powered by squirrel (E) is pointed 
Meanwhile, cable (F) carries signal from
interested team members (H) can observe.
click here¡­
click here¡­
you do next?
darned!
I don¡¯t recommend using the camcorder to videotape the sessions. In fact, I used to
never used and it made the whole process more complicated and expensive.
faster,  disk drives have gotten much larger, and screen recording software has
the test PC and record everything that happens on the screen and everything the
these files are very valuable because they¡¯re much easier to review quickly than
always use a screen recorder during user tests. 
Almost anyone can facilitate a usability test; all it really takes is the courage to try
Try to choose someone who tends to be patient, calm, empathetic, a good listener,
¡°definitely not a people person¡± or ¡°the office crank.¡± 
Anybody who wants to. It¡¯s a good idea to encourage everyone¡ªteam members,
to attend. 
organization should be investing in usability, my strongest recommendation
usabil ity  testing on 10 cents a  day
4 There are a number of screen recorders available, but I¡¯m partial to Camtasia, made 
(http://www.techsmith.com). It¡¯s very reliable and has a number of extremely useful
specifically designed for capturing usability tests¡ªsort of like Camtasia on steroids¡ªwhich
chapter 9
investment.¡± The tactic that I think works best is getting management to observe
and it would be great for the Web team¡¯s morale if they could just poke their head
longer than they¡¯d planned, because it¡¯s the first time they¡¯ve seen their site in
What do you test, and when do you test it?
phase of Web development. 
They may be actual competitors, or they may be sites that are similar in style,
Use them yourself, then watch one or two other people use them and see what
having someone build a working prototype for you for free.
pressure-free chance to get the hang of it. It will also give you a chance to develop 
personally when people don¡¯t get it. Testing someone else¡¯s site first will help you
Since the comparable sites are ¡°live,¡± you can do two kinds of testing: ¡°Get it¡± testing
> ¡°Get it¡± testing is just what it sounds like: show them the site, and see if they
organized, how it works, and so on.
well they do.
observe users doing tasks that they have a hand in choosing. It¡¯s much better, 
recently¡± than ¡°Find a cookbook for under $14.¡± When people are doing made-
of their personal knowledge.
design ideas to users, beginning with your first rough sketches. Designers are 
comment on something that looks unfinished, since they know you haven¡¯t got
design, users won¡¯t be distracted by details of implementation and they can focus
Later, as you begin building parts of the site or functioning prototypes, you can
I also recommend doing what I call Cubicle tests: Whenever you build a new
the person in the next cubicle and see if they can make sense out of it. This kind
A sample test session
is real, but it has since been redesigned. The participant¡¯s name is Janice, and
usabil ity  testing on 10 cents a  day
chapter 9
5 A copy of the script is available on my Web site (www.sensible.com) so you can download it
6 If you didn¡¯t work on the part that¡¯s being tested, you can also say, ¡°Don¡¯t worry about
This whole first section is
conduct tests.5
front of me, and I don¡¯t
but I find it¡¯s good to ad lib
making mistakes. When the
comfortable making
pressure o? them.
I¡¯m going to be walking you through 
You probably already know, but let me explain
testing a Web site that we¡¯re working on so we
I want to make it clear right away that we¡¯re
wrong here. In fact, this is probably the one
about making mistakes.
please don¡¯t worry that you¡¯re going to hurt
need to know honestly what you think. 
out loud, to tell me what¡¯s going through your
INTRODUCTION
[ 147 ]
this, because it will seem
questions as you go along.
before you start that (a)
(b) you¡¯ll try to answer
want to know.
will say something like, ¡°I¡¯m
America¡¯s Funniest Home
Give them the release and
(if required) to sign. Both
possible and written in
7
able to answer them right away, since we¡¯re
have someone sitting next to them, but I will
when we¡¯re done.
keep us moving, but we¡¯ll try to make sure that
You may have noticed the camera. With your
screen and what you have to say. The recording
improve the site, and it won¡¯t be seen by anyone
also helps me, because I don¡¯t have to take as
watching the screen in another room.
something for us. It simply says that we have
only be seen by the people working on the
anybody about what we¡¯re showing you today,
Do you have any questions before we begin?
7 You¡¯ll find a sample recording consent form on my Web site.
[ 148 ]
just a few quick questions. First, what¡¯s your
I¡¯m a router.
router do, exactly?
and send them to the right office.
would you say you spend using the Internet,
Oh, I don¡¯t know. Probably an hour a day at
home. Mostly that¡¯s on the weekend. I¡¯m
playing games sometimes.
for instance, tell me what you do, at work and
Well, at the office I spend most of my time
lot of it¡¯s junk but I have to go through it
something at work.
with a few questions to get
how they use the Internet.
loosen up a little and gives
you¡¯re going to be listening
say¡ªand that there are no
Don¡¯t hesitate to admit
anything. Your role here 
as an expert, but as a 
Notice that she¡¯s not sure
spends on the Internet.
worry. Accurate answers
main point here is just to
thinking about how she
give you a chance to gauge
BACKGROUND QUESTIONS
[ 149 ]
Yahoo, I guess. I like Yahoo, and I use it all
Snakes.com, because I have a pet snake.
A python. He¡¯s about four feet long, but
he¡¯s fully grown.
anything on the Internet? How do you feel
I¡¯ve bought some things recently. I didn¡¯t
couldn¡¯t get things delivered. It was hard
home during the day. But now one of my
And what have you bought?
and it worked out much better than I
OK, great. We¡¯re done with the questions, and
OK, I guess.
and find out a little more
you come back to the topic
chapter 9
First, I¡¯m just going to ask you to look at this
strikes you about it, and what you think you
For now, don¡¯t actually click on anything. Just
And again, as much as possible, it will help us
what you¡¯re thinking about.
but minimized. At this
click to maximize it.
usabil ity  testing on 10 cents a  day
Well, I guess the first thing I notice is that
and I like the little picture of the sun [at
Let¡¯s see. [Reads.] ¡°The global services
your job done.¡±
idea.
Cool Stuff section on the left.] ¡°3D graphics
marketplace.¡±
just as likely that the
she hates this shade of
drawing is too simplistic.
individual reactions to
chapter 9
This user is doing a good
her own. If she wasn¡¯t, this
her, ¡°What are you
There¡¯s a lot going on here. But I have no
If you had to take a guess, what do you think it
Well, it seems to have something to do with
[Looks around the page again.] Now that I
category list halfway down the page], I guess
creative...they all sound like services.
selling services. Maybe like some kind of
OK. Now, if you were at home, what would you
usabil ity  testing on 10 cents a  day
I ask this question because
most users are going to
pictures of the five steps,
least look at them.
I¡¯m interested in 3D graphics.
question. What about these pictures near the
What did you make of them?
them out. I guess I thought they were telling
Any reason why you didn¡¯t pay much
No. I guess I just wasn¡¯t ready to start 
to use it yet. I just wanted to look 
OK. Great.
[ 154 ]
Can you think of something you might want to
Hmm. Let me think. I think I saw ¡°Home
thinking of building a deck. Maybe I would
So if you were going to post the deck as a
I guess I¡¯d click on one of the categories
improvement.[Looks.] There it is, under
So what would you do?
two links under ¡°Family and Household.¡±]
perform so we can see
site for its intended
Whenever possible, it¡¯s
some say in choosing the
TESTING A TASK
[ 155 ]
click on Home Improvement, so it looks like
Price.¡± But I don¡¯t know what the
Fixed price I sort of understand; they¡¯ll
stick to it. But I¡¯m not sure what RFPs is.
Fixed price, I guess.
As it turns out, she¡¯s
this case) means services
rate, while an RFP (or
actually the choice that
kind of misunderstanding
people who built the site.
while she tries to post a
continue until either (a)
she gets really frustrated,
anything new by watching
I¡¯d give her three or four
should take not more than
chapter 9
Review the results right away
development team to review everyone¡¯s observations and decide what to do next.
debrief  over lunch.
> Triage¡ªreviewing the problems people saw and deciding which ones need to 
> Problem solving¡ªfiguring out how to fix them.
team members who¡¯ve been arguing about the right way to do things all along. So
Just this: 
testing usually just make sense. They tend to be
Also, the experience of seeing your handiwork through someone else¡¯s eyes will
new light.
perfect solution. You just need to figure out what to try next.
Here are the types of problems you¡¯re going to see most often when you test:
or a page and they either don¡¯t know what to make of it, or they think they do
> The words they¡¯re looking for aren¡¯t there. This usually means that either
[ 157 ]
would use, or (b) the categories are what they expect, but you¡¯re just not using
> There¡¯s too much going on. Sometimes what they¡¯re looking for is right
(a) reduce the overall noise on the page, or (b) turn up the volume on the things
Some triage guidelines
> Ignore ¡°kayak¡± problems. In any test, you¡¯re likely to see several cases
almost immediately without any help. It¡¯s kind of like rolling over in a kayak;
fun. In basketball terms, no harm, no foul. 
headed in the right direction quickly, and (b) they manage to recover without
general, if the user¡¯s second guess about where to find things is always right,
Of course, if there¡¯s an easy and obvious fix that won¡¯t break anything else,
the development team. They¡¯re usually there because of some ambiguity for
or two oddball items that don¡¯t fit perfectly into any of the top-level categories
other half will look for them in Arts first. Whatever you do, half of them are
guess, which is fine.8 
for things to ¡°live¡± in only one place in a hierarchy, with a prominent ¡°see also¡± crosslink in
chapter 9
> Resist the impulse to add things. When it¡¯s obvious in testing that users
an explanation or some instructions.
obscuring the meaning, rather than adding yet another distraction.
like it better if it could do x.¡± It always pays to be suspicious of these requests for
perfectly fine source for x and wouldn¡¯t be likely to switch; they¡¯re just telling
> Grab the low-hanging fruit. The main thing you¡¯re looking for in each round
> Head slappers. These are the surprises that show up
were obvious to everyone the moment they saw the
money, and you should fix them right away.
(a) require almost no effort, or (b) require a little
And finally, there¡¯s one last piece of advice about ¡°making changes¡± that deserves
Don¡¯t throw the baby out with the dishes 
it¡¯s important to keep in mind that even a minor change can have a major impact.
without breaking the parts that already work. 
affected. In particular, when you¡¯re making something more prominent than it
usabil ity  testing on 10 cents a  day
One morning a month: that¡¯s all we ask 
doing usability testing.
When you leave lunch, the team will have decided what you¡¯re going to fix, and
Doing it all in a morning also greatly increases the chances that most team
is highly desirable.
find some more advice about how to do it in a chapter called ¡°Usability testing:
all about do-it-yourself usability testing, but I do not want you to wait for it before
9 You can download the chapter for free at http://www.sensible.com/secondedition.
common courtesy 
chapter
1 Mensch: a German-derived Yiddish word originally meaning ¡°human being.¡± A person of
[ 161 ]
Concerned, I did what anyone would do: (a) Start checking Google News every
what they were saying about it.
strike on the airline¡¯s Home page, but there wasn¡¯t a word about it to be found
FAQ lists. Nothing but business as usual. ¡°Strike? What strike?¡±
really only one frequently asked question related to the site, and it¡¯s being asked
What¡¯s going to happen to me? 
Is there really going to be a strike?
If there is a strike, what will happen?
What will you do to help me?
What was I to take away from this? 
circumstances, (b) for some legal or business reason they didn¡¯t want to admit
interested, or (d) they just couldn¡¯t be bothered. 
If you can fake that, the rest is easy.
chapter 10
No matter what the real reason was, they did an outstanding job of depleting my
spend hundreds of millions of dollars a year polishing¡ªhad definitely lost some
Most of this book has been about building clarity into Web sites: making sure that
undue effort. Is it clear to people? Do they ¡°get it¡±?
thing¡ªbeing considerate of the user. Besides ¡°Is my site clear?¡± you also need 
The Reservoir of Goodwill
start out with a reservoir of goodwill. Each problem we encounter on the site
site might have looked like:
My goodwill is a little low,
that their negotiations
inconvenience me.
days old.
No promising links, but
which is very annoying.
sell me more tickets
they're going to fly me
I search for ¡°strike¡± and find
strike a year ago, and pages
about a strike in the 1950s.
leave, but they're the sole
I look through their FAQ
I glance around the
It feels well organized,
confident that if the
be able to find it.
the strike on the
I don¡¯t like the fact
business as usual.
links to News stories 
none are relevant.
Releases link at the
usabil ity  as  common courtesy
The reservoir is limited, and if you treat users badly enough and exhaust it
outcome; they may just not be as eager to use your site in the future, or they may
There are a few things worth noting about this reservoir:
reservoir, some small. Some people are more
inherently more patient, trusting, or optimistic. The
> It¡¯s situational. If I¡¯m in a huge hurry, or have 
my expendable goodwill may already be low 
a large reserve.
that have diminished my goodwill, you can
like you¡¯re looking out for my best interests.
instance, just opening up a registration form with
people¡¯s reserve to plunge instantly to zero.
of here
[ 164 ]
Here are a few of the things that tend to make users feel like the people
> Hiding information that I want. The most common things to hide are
The whole point of hiding support phone numbers is to try to keep users 
goodwill and ensure that they¡¯ll be even more annoyed when they do find 
perhaps even on every page¡ªsomehow knowing that they can call if they
longer, increasing the chances that they¡¯ll solve the problem themselves.
process that they¡¯ll feel vested in it by the time they experience the ¡°sticker
like airports. Having seen a ¡°Wireless access available!¡± sign and knowing
to connect. But then you have to scan, read, and click your way through three
before you get to a page that even hints at what it might cost you.  It feels like
and keep throwing more of their marketing pitch at you, maybe they can
Punishing me for not doing things your way. I should never have to think
number, spaces in my credit card number, or parentheses in my phone
when the spaces actually make it much easier to get the number right. Don¡¯t
of code. 
[ 165 ]
skeptical of requests for personal information, and find it annoying if a site
Shucking and jiving me. We're
sincerity, and disingenuous
care about me can be particularly
through your head every time you
Putting sizzle in my way. Having to wait through a long Flash intro, or
that you don¡¯t understand¡ªor care¡ªthat I¡¯m in a hurry. 
disorganized, or unprofessional, like no effort has gone into making it
Note that while people love to make comments about the appearance of sites¡ª
a site just because it doesn¡¯t look great. (I tell people to ignore all comments
people use a word like ¡°puke¡± to describe the color scheme. Then it¡¯s worth
There may be times when you¡¯ll choose to have your site do some of these user-
exactly what the customer wants. For instance, uninvited pop-ups almost always
more revenue by using pop-ups and you think it¡¯s worth annoying your users,
rather than inadvertently.
high call volume¡± is keeping me 
because my call is important 
2 This actually happened once during a round of testing I facilitated. We changed the color.
[ 166 ]
The good news is that even if you make mistakes, it¡¯s possible to restore my
Most of these are just the flip side of the other list: 
them obvious and easy. It¡¯s usually not hard to figure out what people 
everything else about their organization¡¯s site almost always give me the same
do?¡± The problem is, making those things easy doesn¡¯t always become the top
mortgage, nothing should get in the way of making it dead easy to apply for 
Tell me what I want to know. Be upfront about things like shipping costs,
upfront about. You may lose points if your shipping rates are higher than 
for me to make up the difference.
shipping company¡¯s tracking number for my purchase, put a link in my email
(As usual, Amazon was the first site to do this for me.)
where it seems like an enormous amount of work has gone into (a) generating
and useful, (c) presenting it clearly, and (d) organizing it so I can find it. I¡¯ve
I¡¯ve been able to solve it on my own.
[ 167 ]
Asked Questions lists are enormously valuable, especially if 
(also known as QWWPWAs: Questions We Wish People Would Ask). 
easily give you a list of this week¡¯s five most frequently asked questions.
> They¡¯re candid. Often people are looking in the FAQs for the answer to
goes a long way to increasing goodwill.
love being able to print stories that span multiple pages with a single click,
additional effort. Drop the ads (the possibility of a banner ad having any
space on paper), but don¡¯t drop the illustrations, photos, and figures.
testing, you¡¯ll be able to spare me from many errors before they happen. 
obvious way for me to recover. See Defensive Design for the Web in my
When in doubt, apologize. Sometimes you can¡¯t help it: You just don¡¯t 
university¡¯s library system requires separate passwords for each of your
you can¡¯t do what they want, at least let them know that you know you¡¯re
Accessibility,
Sheets, and you
by with buttered toast strapped to its back
11 
eople sometimes ask me, ¡°What about accessibility? Isn¡¯t that part of usability?¡±
people with disabilities aren¡¯t part of your audience, you really can¡¯t say your site is
At this point,1 everyone involved in Web design knows at least a little bit about Web
And yet almost every site I go to fails my three-second accessibility test¡ªincreasing
Why is that?
always lands with the buttered side facing down. I propose to strap buttered toast to
buttered-cat array, a high-speed monorail could easily link New York with Chicago.
P
Browser 
command
1 2005 AD
Section 508 of the 1988 Amendments to the Rehabilitation Act, which specifies accessibility
wants to do business with the U.S. government.
In most organizations, the people who end up being responsible for doing
designers and the developers.
they pick up inevitably list the same set of reasons why they need to make their
There¡¯s a lot of truth in all of these. Unfortunately, there¡¯s also a lot that¡¯s unlikely
accessibility.¡± Two arguments in particular tend to make them skeptical:
them to believe that a large percentage of the population actually needs help
that people make when they¡¯re advocating for a worthy cause, but there¡¯s also a
entitled to be skeptical about the rest.¡± 
benefits everyone. Some adaptations do, like the classic example, closed
since this always seems to be the only example cited, it feels a little like arguing
chapter 11
not just a good
Most accessibility
everyone, not just
It ¡®s a huge potential
population has a disability.
It makes good business sense.
the Web, and they have lots of
Everyone should have
and equal access 
[ 171 ]
that the space program was worthwhile because it gave us Tang.4 It¡¯s much
adaptations are likely to make things worse for ¡°everyone else.¡±
really only one reason that¡¯s important:
And not just the right thing; it¡¯s profoundly the right thing to do, because the one
extraordinarily better it makes some people¡¯s lives. Personally, I don¡¯t think
computer can now read the daily newspaper on their own. Imagine that.
by doing our job a little better? 
there will be a legislative stick coming sooner or later. Count on it.
As they learn more about accessibility, two fears tend to emerge:
more complicated new thing to fit into an already impossible project schedule.
with time-consuming reports, reviews, and task force meetings. 
cats: places where good design for people with disabilities and good design for
going to be forced to design sites that are less appealing¡ªand less useful¡ªfor
4 A powdered orange-flavored breakfast drink, invented for the astronauts (see also: freeze-
[ 172 ]
In an ideal world, accessibility would work like a sign I saw in the back of a
way it caught the light made me take a closer look, and when I did, I realized 
The sign was overlaid with a thin piece of Plexiglas, and the message was
would have been half as large so they could both fit on the sign, but with this
I think for some designers, though, accessibility conjures up an image something
handicapping everyone.5
a few years away
of advice that sounds very promising:
required by law to wear a ¡°mental handicap radio¡± in his ear that blasts various loud noises
The problem is, when they run their site through a validator, it turns out to be
mistakes and oversights that are easy to fix, like missing alt text.6 But it also
wrong, and a long list of recommendations of things for you to check which it
This can be very discouraging for people who are just learning about
an awful lot to learn. 
After all, most designers and developers are not going to become accessibility
easier to do. Screen readers and other adaptive technologies have to get smarter,
to code correctly for accessibility, and the guidelines need to be improved. 
accessibil ity,  cascading style  sheets,  and you
example), which is essential for people using screen readers or browsing with images turned off.
to make sure your 
WCAG guidelines.
checker for
Real progress is going to require improvements on four different fronts, motivated
to support mobile devices, which share some problems with accessibility.
The fact that it¡¯s not a perfect world at the moment doesn¡¯t let any of us off the
Even with current technology and standards, it¡¯s possible to make any site very
the most impact. And they don¡¯t involve getting anywhere near a buttered cat.
confuse everyone
accessible makes them more usable for everyone¡±) is that it obscures the fact that
the most effective ways to make them more effective for people with disabilities. 
chapter 11
technologies
use of CSS
developer 
Better
and best 
examples
508
Smarter adaptive
Universal 
Better
tools
standards 
practice
[ 175 ]
If something confuses most people who use your site, it¡¯s almost certain to
remarkably smarter because they have a disability.) And it¡¯s very likely that
For instance, think of the last time you had trouble using a Web site (running 
imagine trying to solve that problem without being able to see the page.
often, and continually smooth out the parts that confuse everyone. In fact, if you
people with disabilities still won¡¯t be able to use it. If your site¡¯s not clear to begin
a-pig metaphor here].
As I hope you¡¯ve seen by now, the best way to learn how to make anything more
at using adaptive technology, let alone watching other people use it. 
blind Web users and spending a few hours with them observing how they
Fortunately, someone has done the heavy lifting for you. Mary Theofanos and
number of tasks on a variety of sites and reported what they observed in an
Who Work with Screen Readers.¡±7
example of the kinds of things they learned:
from ACM, Ginny has made it available for personal use at http://redish.net/content/
[ 176 ]
Screen-reader users scan with their ears. Most blind users are just as impatient
possible. They do not listen to every word on the page¡ªjust as sighted users
decide whether to listen further. Many set the voice to speak at an amazingly
They listen to the first few words of a link or line of text. If it does not seem
paragraph. Where a sighted user might find a keyword by scanning over the
of a link or a line of text.
accessibility. In 20 minutes, it will give you an appreciation for the problems
#3. Read a book
weekend) reading a book about Web accessibility. There are several good ones¡­
> Constructing Accessible Websites by Jim Thatcher et al.
Slatin and Sharron Rush
¡­and I¡¯m sure there will be more in the near future.8
now, you just need to get the big picture. 
#4. Start using Cascading Style Sheets
In the beginning, everything was text. When the first visual browsers arrived,
everything, HTML¡ªwhich was really only intended to display research papers¡ª
and it was very hard to position things precisely on a page. And even if you could,
To wrestle back some control, designers
control layout. For years, the only way
Web page was to put them in tables...
ended up seeming like a series of
Unfortunately, this didn¡¯t work well with early
slavishly line-by-line from left to right, like this:
be used, to try to get more control over text styling. It was a messy world of
[ 177 ]
Advanced Common Sense can¡¯t 
online home of web everything I
[ 178 ]
Fortunately, beginning in 1998 some very determined people got fed up with this
standards that would give designers a consistent target. A group of designers
nonviolent resistance: They simply stopped making their own sites backwardly
encouraged others to do the same.
different depending on which of the many designer-contributed style sheets you
with CSS.
doesn¡¯t make any sense to create a site without them, because the advantages are
> Infinitely greater control of formatting.
entire site, or automatically generate useful variations like printer-friendly pages. 
ensure that your CSS works across all browers, but these will fall 
And implementing CSS will make it easy for you to do two things that will
> Serialize your content. Unlike table-based layout, with CSS you can put your
user will hear it¡ªand still position things where you want them on the page.
which is enormously helpful for low-vision users (and people old enough to
9 www.csszengarden.com. See The Zen of CSS Design by Dave Shea and Molly Holzschlag
[ 179 ]
Probably the fastest way to learn CSS is to get someone who specializes in it to do
and learn by watching them do it. When you¡¯re ready, there are also a number of
#5. Go for the low-hanging fruit
implementing specific changes in your HTML code.
> Add appropriate alt text to every image.Add an alt attribute for images that
the Web accessibility books have very good explanations of how to do this.
using the HTML label element to associate the fields with their prompts, so
> Create a ¡°Skip to Main Content¡± link at the beginning of each page.
navigation at the top of every page before you could look at the content, and
> Make all content accessible by keyboard. Remember, not everyone can use
> Don¡¯t use JavaScript without a good reason. Some adaptive technologies
> Use client-side (not server-side) image maps. Alt tags don¡¯t work with
That¡¯s it. You¡¯ll probably learn how to do a lot more as you go along, but even if
Hopefully in five years I¡¯ll be able to just remove this chapter and use the space
guidelines will all have matured and will be integrated to the point where people
Help! My boss
when bad design decisions happen to good people
1 11 2
W
I¡¯ve noticed that a lot of the questions people ask take 
Help! My boss (or ¡°My marketing manager,¡± or 
For instance, ¡°My marketing manager insists that we make people provide their
Two of these questions about usability disasters imposed from above tend to come
> My boss wants us to ask users for more personal information than we 
> My boss wants our site to have more ¡°pizazz¡± (read: splash pages, animation,
I've reached the point where when people ask me either of these questions, I¡¯ll
email (from a usability ¡°expert¡±¡ªwith a book, no less) explaining why this is a
Here are the emails. Feel free to use them as you see fit.
¡ªgeena davis in the fly
chapter 12
From: Steve Krug (skrug@sensible.com)
At my recent Web usability workshop in [name of city], your Web [designer|developer|
ask for on a registration form. I offered to send you email recapping my advice to him.
email newsletter (or request a free sample, register a product, or create an acount).
in return.
quickly discover why. For no good reason, you're being asked to provide your mailing
a project.
bad idea.¡±
given the uses you can put it to. The problem is that people filling in any kind of form
information? Do they really need it to give me what I want?¡± If the answer is no, then
In most people's minds there are only are two possible explanations: either (a) you¡¯re so
know, but you want the information badly for some other purpose, and you don¡¯t mind
As a result, there are three serious downsides to asking for more than what you need:
for more than you need, they feel completely justified in lying to you. I often tell my
doesn't strike them as odd that 10% of their subscribers happen to be named
- You get fewer completed forms. The formula is simple: the less data you ask for, the
if the form looks even a little bit longer than they expect, many just won't bother.
[ 183 ]
whatever hoops they have to, but make no mistake: it will diminish their impression of
need, you've established a relationship with them and can get more data later in
Here are three guidelines:
- Don¡¯t ask for a lot of optional information, either. Just the sight of a lot of fields is
- Show me the value I'm going to receive in exchange for my information. Tell me
I hope this is helpful. By the way, based on the brief chance I had to chat with [your
have [him|her] on your team.
Author of Don¡¯t Make Me Think! A Common Sense Approach to Web Usability
From: Steve Krug (skrug@sensible.com)
Your Web [designer|developer|manager],[your name], recently attended one of my Web
visually interesting|more engaging] by adding [a splash page|some animation|large
I told [him|her] I'd be happy to pass along some of the advice I give to my own executive
Unfortunately, there's an inherent problem with the way executives are involved in Web
solicited. But because of the way sites are developed, all you're really asked to comment
have to go on, the only thing you can reasonably judge is ¡°Does it look good to me?¡± and
that's more visually appealing, something with more ¡°pizzazz¡± or ¡°sizzle.¡±
chapter 12
sites don't really need much sizzle. Yes, looks do count. Yes, it has to look presentable,
Most of the time on the Web, people don¡¯t want to be engaged; they just want to get
are perceived as annoying, clueless, and the worst kind of hucksterism. And attempts to
all the different forms of sizzle: Splash pages that signal you as several years behind the
hotel room?) and leave less room on the page for what people are looking for. And
Unless your site gives people the information they want and makes it easy for them to
clueless about the Web, or you care more about your image than you do about them.
where what you're selling is sizzle: entertainment sites (for music, movies, etc.), pure
developers. But if your site isn't on that list, most sizzle is going to be
The moral is, you can do as much as you want to make your site look good, but only if it's
well.
¡°flashy,¡± or because they have content you want or need? Can you name a site that has
interesting enough?
By the way, you¡¯re lucky to have [your name]on your Web team.[He|she really knows
Steve Krug
[ 185 ]
Never say never
things. If there's one thing you learn by working on a lot of different Web sites,
usable in the right circumstances, with enough effort. And almost any good
implementation.
shouldn't be doing any of them unless (a) you really know what you're doing, 
you're done to make sure you've managed to make it work; you're not just going
Also, realize that your boss is probably not just being perverse. There is almost
bad design idea. Trying to understand that good intention is often the best way to
That¡¯s all, folks
hope you¡¯ll check in at my Web site www.sensible.com from time to time. 
Web site is an enormous challenge, and anyone who gets it even half right has 
And please don¡¯t take anything I¡¯ve said as being against breaking ¡°the rules¡±¡ªor
to make people think, to puzzle or challenge them. Just be sure you know which
bending them.
reading
T here are dozens of worthwhile usability-relatedbooks and Web sites I could recommend, but these are the ones that havereally influenced the way I think about the Web.
World Wide Web
Hands down, the single most useful book about Web site design.
admirable clarity and practicality.
Paco Underhill, Simon and Schuster, 2000 
shoppers in their natural habitat. Even though the subject is the
Web design: creating complex, engaging environments where people
> Sources of Power: How People Make Decisions
Klein¡¯s study of naturalistic decision making is another wonderful
between the way we think we do things and the way we actually
We Buy would both be in it.
enjoyment of reading the original, obtainable at your school or public library. 
of every classics illustrated comic book 
recommended reading
Dynamic Group Problem Solving
I took a course in the Synectics method thirty-five years ago, 
something I learned from it. Think of it as brainstorming on
people work in groups. The book is out of print, but you can
> Jakob Nielsen¡¯s Web site, useit.com (www.useit.com). Beginning with
articulate and thought-provoking advocate. And since the advent of the Web,
preaching the value of Web usability. 
admire the way he says it. His site houses his
admire him: a columnist who¡¯s smart enough to
every week), and links to all of the best usability
Also check out his Nielsen Norman Group reports
pricey (typically $100-$300), but they contain reliable information you won't
audience segments (like children, seniors, and people with disabilities). 
u 
is man?
recommended reading
Deconstructed
The bad news about this book is that after you¡¯ve seen the
The good news, though, is that the excellent set of 113 Home
worth the price of the entire book.
for Web-Based Software
Susan and Victor have written the Junior Woodchucks Guidebook
including tons of best practice examples, insights from years of
or building Web applications, you'd be foolish not to have a copy.
37 Signals, New Riders, 2004
Other Crisis Points) says it all. An excellent, practical, short
prevent user errors from happening, and to help them recover
[ 190 ]
> The Design of Everyday Things
Originally published as The Psychology of Everyday Things,
Psychology department of bookstores, this actually is a
won¡¯t find any mention of the Web, but the principles are
You¡¯ll never look at doorknobs the same way again.
Joseph Dumas and Janice (Ginny) Redish, Intellect, 1999
favorite¡ªat least until I write the one I keep scribbling 
Ginny is also currently writing a book on writing for the
In the same vein, Caroline Jarrett (www.formsthatwork.com/),
writing the definitive book on, well...designing Web forms. If it hasn¡¯t appeared
> Usability News
This newsletter is my favorite source of usability research. Published twice a
(SURL), it always contains several very nice, bite-sized pieces of well-thought-
[ 191 ]
> WebWord
John Rhodes
http://www.usabilityviews.com/
These sites are currently the two best ways to keep up to date on
WebWord is more of a true blog in that he comments on the articles he
looking at. Between the two of them, you won¡¯t miss anything.
guidelines
This excellent set of Web design and
National Cancer Institute (NCI), includes
research each guideline is based on. 
worth checking here first to see if they¡¯ve
www.usability.gov
¡­and all i got was this lousy t-shirt
Don¡¯t kid yourself. a book like this is largely thework of one person. There¡¯s no other single human being who¡¯s spentnearly as much time as I have thinking about it, perseverating over it,
over and over. 
less than bupkus. And even if I¡¯d had a million years to work on it, you¡¯d never be
patience, generosity, and forbearance of many people. 
I¡¯ve always heard horror stories about stormy farmer/cowman relationships
where I¡¯ve gone astray. With a book¡ªjust as with a Web site¡ªyou don¡¯t have to
fortunate enough to have the benefit of two editors:
idea, always knew what I was trying to get at (even when I didn¡¯t), never
around. If you write a book, you should be so lucky. I will miss not having an
> Barbara Flanagan, a longtime friend and masterful copy editor who by her
manuscript at several stages out of the goodness of her heart, in her copious
myself into.
or Barbara¡ªor both¡ªsaying, ¡°Well, if you really insist....¡±
cooperation this film would never have been made.
[ 194 ]
In designing this book, Allison Cecil knowingly took on a maniac¡¯s job.1
book espousing his own design principles and insists that the book has to reflect
had to be done in a nightmarishly small amount of time. She managed it only by
grace, and (b) displaying talent equal to her patience. As with Karen and Barbara,
only because I twisted her arm.
Sandra Schroeder at Macmillan made major contributions to the design and
Roger Black has generously encouraged my work for years now, and it¡¯s always a
that form over his head. The only downside is that I all-too-rarely get to enjoy the
suggestion that I do this book in the first place, and he and Jock Spivy saw to it
Alexandra Anderson-Spivy (¡°Ally¡±) managed the project from Circle.com¡¯s end
support from start to finish. 
I relied on many people to tell me whether I was actually making any sense, or
¡°stuffed full of wild blueberries.¡± But I relied most heavily on my two best friends:
fire, everybody runs out, you run in. It¡¯s a maniac¡¯s job.¡±
[ 195 ]
> Paul Shakespear spent many hours¡ªhours
drafts that barely made sense, things I could
what to complete and what to throw overboard.
interesting than this book, as is always the case
> Richard Gingras knows more about online publishing and creating a positive 
enabled me to go on, as his friendship has made many things in my life
Mitzi Trumbo, their daughter, Molly, and Mitzi¡¯s wonderful mother, Cleo, as
says. Their companionship means more to me than I can say here.
read and comment on various drafts: Sue Hay, Hilary Goodall, Peggy
Wurman, Jeff Veen, Donna Slote, Matt Stark, Christine Bauer, Bob Gower,
testing, their reactions and suggestions improved the end result enormously.
and one of the most pleasant and interesting people¡ªmade an outlandishly
Gail Blumberg was my problem-solving ¡°lifeline¡± through this whole process,
politics and making me laugh while she did it. At this point, I owe her so many
My next-door neighbor, graphic designer Courtney McGlynn¡ªwho has
whenever I¡¯ve needed to do a quick user test¡ªhelped me think through some
Little Wing 
59" x 28"
paulshakespear.com
acknowledgments
Dave Flanagan, John Kirsch, and Jon Hirschtick taught me by their example
enabled me to be comfortable working as a consultant. John also dragged me
standing by patiently while I learned to write something longer than a page¡ªa
even looking at it¡ªjust by showing me by his example over the years what really
Clients, co-workers, clients-turned-friends,
Much of what I know about Web usability came from working with many smart,
Goecke, Jim Kent, Bill McCall, Dan Roam, James Caldwell, John Lyle
Family
years of holding me down and tickling me.
meant turning down the sound on his computer while he played Midtown
manuscript along to our local Barnes & Noble to see how it would look on the
My wife Melanie Sokol has told me for a long time now that I¡¯d better not say
supportive during the four months the book was supposed to take, and even
it was little things, like the fact that I apparently had no idea when¡ªif ever¡ªI
[ 197 ]
Other
feel like a nuisance in all the mornings I occupied a table for hours on end,
into space.
Hopefully, by the time you read this, your T-shirt will be in the mail.
I consider myself very fortunate that when I went to round up the usual
her!), Paul Shakespear, Barbara Flanagan and Roger Black¡ªthey all
Once again Harry and Melanie have put up with
making it all worthwhile.
knowledge with me, including Ginny Redish,
Carol Barnum, and Lou Rosenfeld, my
friend.
Kim Lombardi, and the rest, and particularly to Rachel Charlton Tiley (and
requests with great patience over the years.
They have really good fruit salad¡ªfirm grapes being the key¡ªand they¡¯ve been
Finally, to everyone who¡¯s written me or said hello in person because of the book,
Harry Krug, circa 2005
index
$25,000 Pyramid, 36
508. See Section 508
Accessibility, 169
searching, 17
Animal, vegetable, or mineral?, 41
B
big honking report, 3, 138
browse-dominant users, 55
Burma-Shave, 31
Camtasia, 143
clickability, 14, 37
conventions, 34, 60
D¨CE
Home page, 95
Dumas, Joseph, 190
expert usability review, 3
FAQ, 166
Should Be Friends, The,¡± 122
forms, 63
G
muddling through, 27
global navigation. See persistent navigation
goodwill reservoir, 163¨C167
Hansel and Gretel, 76
[ 200 ]
Hatch, Sen. Orrin, 37
hierarchy, 95
Home page
different navigation on, 107
I¨CK
Jarrett, Caroline, 190
Klein, Gary, 24, 187
L
lost-our-lease usability testing,  135, 137
mensch, 160, 161, 162
mission statement, 103
muddling through, 26¨C29
names, importance of, 14
conventions, 60
lower-level, 70
revealing content, 59
new feature requests, 158
noise. See visual noise
P¨CQ
importance of, 71
position on page, 72
primary navigation. See Sections
Prince, George M., 188
promos
feature promos, 96
R
registration, 96
[ 201 ]
religious debates, 124, 129
Rosenfeld, Louis, 67, 187
satisficing, 24¨C25
search box, 38, 67
options, 68
search-dominant users, 54
Section 508, 169
Sections, 65
sizzle, 184
Spool, Jared, 7
street signs, 72
Synectics, 188
tabs, 79
importance of drawing correctly, 82
Talking Heads, 51
Theofanos, Mary, 175
trunk test, 85
Underhill, Paco, 187
usability, defined, 5
usability testing, 3, 135
recruiting participants, 139, 141
sample session, 146
what to test, 144
V¨CZ
visual hierarchy, 31
visual noise, 38
White, E. B., 45
¡°You are here¡± indicator, 27
STEVE KRUG
near-total obscurity as a
consultant until the
almost twenty years making software and Web
Netscape, AOL, Lexus, Excite@Home, and
ROGER BLACK
consultant. Over the past 
teams at Rolling Stone, New
MSNBC.com, and Discovery.com. Recently
Nintendo Power magazine.
ot
Er
Bu
er
using Microsoft Word, Adobe
Layout and production were
Files were passed among all 
proofed using Adobe Acrobat. 
designed by Christian Schwartz,
and paragraph headings were set
Spiekermann. All captions were
designed by Albert Pinggera.
